[MUSIC] Well, it's great to see you here
in class again.
We're getting close to being half way
through Week One.
Right now, you should start to have a feel
for what it's like to program in Python,
you know, about expressions, you know,
about variables, you know, about
functions.
But really the number of operations that
you have at your disposal when building a
Python program is fairly limited.
So, what I'm going to do in this lecture
is I'm going to tell you about a few more
operations that you have at your disposal
to help build more interesting programs.
In particular, I'm going to talk about
remainders in Modular Arithmetic.
I'll talk a little bit about how to work
with strings and numbers.
And then, I'll finish it off by telling
you to get access to some more built in
functions inside Python.
Okay, let's go to it.
So, let's talk about a few more operations
that we can use in Python.
For the first part of the lecture, we are
going to talk about Modular Arithmetic.
Now, you may not have heard that phrase
before, but you actually know how to do
Modular Arithmetic.
In third grade, you learned how to do long
division.
You had a dividend and a divisor, and you
divided the, divided one into the other.
What came out was a quotient and
remainder.
So, that remainder is actually,
essentially your computing Modular
Arithmetic when you compute remainders.
So, I'm going to give you a few examples
illustrating how to use Modular
Arithmetic.
So, let's start of with a really simple
problem.
Let's say, we have a 2-digit number, and
we'd like to compute its tens digit and
its ones digit.
So, how can we get the tens digit?
I think it's not too hard, we actually
have something that computes the quotient,
it's the energy division operator slash,
slash.
So, we could say num energy divided by ten
so, ten goes into 49 four times, so I'm
going to predict we're going to get out
the number four.
Sure enough.
Now, we'd like to also get the ones digit.
So, how can we do that?
Well, we need to compute the remainder.
Whenever we take num, we take the
remainder with respect to ten.
So, let's see if we can find out what the
remainder operation is in Python.
Let's go to CodeSkulptor Python.
And we're going to squeeze down here.
Let's see.
Integers and floating-point numbers.
Let's scroll down.
Hm.
Modular Arithmetic that sounds kind of
plausible.
And sure enough, that's actually what
we're going to use.
We're going to use the send operator to
compute a remainder here.
So, we could say, print tens. Now, we can
print out the ones digit also and we get
49.
And notice we can always reconstruct the
original number by just taking ten times
the tens digit plus the ones digit.
So, there's nothing special about 49 here.
That actually works no matter what.
Alright, let's talk about another example
of Modular Arithmetic using remainder.
So, this is the classical example that
you'll see, it's called clock arithmetic.
And the idea is we're going to want to do
computations involving hours, and either a
12-hour or 24-hour clock.
So, let's pop over to one note here.
And what you can see right here is I might
have kind of two tables.
The one on the one on left here.
This is the 12-hour clock.
And so, we list all the hours in the day
on the 12-hour clock.
We have twelve hours that are a.m., twelve
hours in p.m.
Notice that the hours start at twelve,
And one, two, three, four, five, six,
seven, eight, nine, ten, and eleven.
If we'd like to do arithmetic on the
12-hour clock, we can almost use remainder
to do that.
So, let's go down here and consider a
problem.
Right now, in this clock, I have listing
the time as I have the time listed as
eight:00 p.m.
So, here it is eight:00 p.m.
Now, I would like to skip and figure out
kind of eight hours ahead what the new
time would be.
So, let's go down here and we'll just
write hours and I'll draw very carefully.
My handwriting is not so great so I'll try
to go slow here.
So, we go ahead, we end up here,
And where do we end up?
We end up at four:00 a.m.
And what do we do up here?
We went plus eight hours.
So, we could do that using remainder.
We could take eight plus eight would be
sixteen, I take this remainder twelve,
that would be four.
But now, it's a little awkward here
because we have to change a.m. to p.m. and
the big problem is that in some sense, if
we end up with twelve and we take the
remainder twelve we get zero.
But, in this clock, kind of zero is
twelve.
So, the, the 12-hour clock is not a great
clock for kind of doing power arithmetic.
So, there's another clock, and it's
preferred by the military, for probably
this is one of the reasons why, it's
called the 24-hour clock.
There's no a.m.
And p.m.
The, the starting hour is at zero, it's
0000, and it's 0100, 0200, all the way up
to 2100, 2200, 2300.
And so, in this model, we can do clock
arithmetic in a much cleaner way.
So, I have an example over here.
I have an example over here, that
involves, let's see.
There are 2000. What do we want to do?
We want to go ahead eight hours.
So, we drop that real quick.
So, I can go here, and that would be I
guess, 0400.
So, we'd like to go for eight hours here.
So, we could do that, we could say, plus,
plus eight hours.
And so, what can we do?
We can use modular, Arithmetic to do this.
And this is actually is much cleaner
because we could take twenty plus eight,
that's 28.
We can take a remainder 24, that's four.
So, we can really use Modular Arithmetic
and remainders to actually do, essentially
computation of hours on the military clock
very easily, the 24-hour clock.
So, let's go back and do that in
CodeSkulptor real quick.
So, let's pop back over here.
So, here we have hours twenty, so we're at
2000..
So, that's military time.
And we like to go through and actually
figure out what the time will be after we
finish an 8-hour shift.
So, we could do that, we could say print
hour plus shift, remainder 24.
So, if we print that,
We got 28 out.
What happened here?
We thought we were going to get four.
Well, let's think about this as a, in
terms of precedents.
Remainder has higher precedence than plus.
So, what happenned here in Python, was
that we computed shift remainder 24.
So, let's say, the shift was eight, so is
eight remainder 24 is eight, we added that
to twenty, we got 28.
So, to actually do this computation
correctly, what we need to do is we need
to go through and add first and then, take
the remainder second.
So, we do that,
What comes out is four.
Okay, let's do another example.
Okay.
Let's look at one more application using
Modular Arithmetic.
And this will be something she'll actually
do fairly often in the class.
You're going to have a 2D game.
Objects may be moving around.
And you have to deal with what happens
when an object gets near the edge of the
canvas.
Maybe it's going to bang off of it.
Maybe it's going to come to stop.
But sometimes, you'd like it to actually
do maybe something where it wraps around.
It goes off one side and comes on the
other side.
Let me just show you a quick little demo.
Here's a part of a game you're going to
actually build later on.
This is a spaceship.
And our spaceship starts flying, and we
get close to the edge of the screen , and
what's going to happen?
Well, it pops on the other side of the
screen, it wrapped around.
If I go off the top of the screen,
I wrapped around.
I go back on the bottom of the screen
after I round the top.
So, how do we model this mathematically?
You could store kind of some, some
information to represent the, the position
of the center of the ship.
But when we go off one edge of the screen,
we better change that position so that
it's kind of in a different position way
on the other side of the screen.
So, we can use Modular Arithmetic to do
that.
So, let's go back and look at this. So,
lets see where the situation where we are
keeping track of the horizontal position
of the ship and so we're at this, the
frame that I created was 800 pixels wide.
So, we are getting close to that
right-hand edge, and we say, we need to go
right five pixels.
How can we do that?
Well, I claimed we can do that using
remainders, we can say, position is equal
to, well, the old position plus whatever
the move was, we could do that remainder,
The width of the screen, and if we print
out position what's going to come out is
two.
The new, the position of the ship after we
move five units right has not overpassed
the right-hand side of the screen.
The screen is actually over the left-hand
screened, side of the screen it positioned
to.
So, we've popped from the right-hand side
to the left-hand side.
The interesting thing is this also works
the other way.
And to do that, you have to understand how
a remainder works on negative numbers.
If we take the remainder of something
that's negative.
What happens is we're always going to get
a number back in the range from zero to
width. Zero to the number that we're
taking the remainder of respect to.
So, what's going to happen is when we take
the remainder of something that's negative
we're going to get something that appears
on the screen,
Something in the right range.
We'll just do that tangibly.
Let's say, we were the other way.
Let's say, we were at position two.
So, we're going to counter reverse this.
We were positioned to, and we did a move
of -five.
We kind of move to the left.
We're on the left-hand side of the screen
and we move left, that's going be -five.
Run the same code.
Well, what's going to come out, we're
going to get two minus five is negative
three.
So, we have to find -three remainder 800.
And I told you that's always going to be a
number between the zero and the width.
So, it comes out as 797.
So, we kind of took -three, we added 800
to it.
It gives a number between zero and 800,
it's 797, so we pop to the right-hand side
of the screen.
So, notice using remainders here actually
works, works in both directions.
It works when you're moving left, it works
when you're moving right, it works when
you're going up, it works when you're
going down.
So, remainder is going to be your friend
when you're doing screen wrapping in your
games.
The next topic that I'd like to cover is
talk a little bit more about how to
convert back and forth between data types.
In the lecture on Arithmetic expressions,
we talked about the operator int and the
operator float, and how those kind of
converted data in other forms into either
an integer or floating-point number.
There's times when you're going to have a
number and you're going to want to convert
it into string so you can print it out.
your first three projects are going to
involve really just doing lots of
printing.
You won't get into using the canvas and
doing drawing until Week four.
So, what I want to do here is just talk a
little bit about how you can convert
things into a string, and so I'm going to
motivate it by just talking about a very
simple problem.
So, we, we talked earlier about 24, the
24-hour clock.
And, in a 24-hour clock, you always kind
of think about the, the hours, as being
two digit even if there's a zero in front
of the, even if it's like three:000 a.m.,
it's really 03.
So, here three:000 a.m. would be 0300.
So, what I'd like to do is talk about how
to take an hour in the 24-hour clock, and
convert it into a string that look like
this.
Especially, make sure it has a leading
zero.
So, to do that, we're going to use a
little bit of Modular Arithmetic using
remainders.
We're going to use what we talked about
before we got the ones in tens digit.
And then, we're going to have to figure
out how to do a couple of string
operations, get those numbers and convert
them into a string.
And then, we're going to have to figure
out how to kind of format that string so
it'll look like something in this form
here.
So, let's see if we can do that.
So, the first thing is let's get the ones
digit.
I think we've already done that with the
10's digit.
So, we can just print those out.
We could print tens and ones, let's just
see what that looks like.
This doesn't look good.
Well, I guess we had a zero and a three.
Okay, yeah, I'll have, let's do this.
Let's print out one more thing, let's
print out a string which has the minutes
or it seems the minutes are, or even hour.
So, if we do that,
We get kind of 03:00..
And you can see there's a bunch of space
is in there and it doesn't look very good.
So, what could we do here?
We could try to convert these numbers into
strings, that might be the first thing.
And then we could think about the other
ways to kind of manage the string to get
it to something that looks like what we
want.
So hm, it turns out that there's a
function that we can do that.
We could convert the number into string
using the str function.
So, we can try our next attempt, we could
say, print str of tens and str of ones.
And then we can keep printing our string
called 00. So now, if we do that.
Well, dang.
It's the exact same thing.
This is now a string, this is now a
string.
But it just turns out they're exactly the
same.
Hm.
But now, that there are strings, we can do
some things to them that we couldn't do
with numbers.
So, for numbers, when we use the plus
separator on them, we added the numbers.
It turns out, Python likes to take common
operators, and try to interpret them as
being applied to things that you're not
used to.
So, for example, there's a plus operator
for strings.
So, what would plus operator do for
strings?
Well, it joins the strings together.
So, what I'm going to do is I'm going to
try one more attempt here.
I'm going to say, print plus the string of
ones, plus and let's add in 00..
Let's try that, to see if anything good
happens.
So, notice what happened here now.
This plus operator joined the strings
together, and it didn't throw an error
because this is a string and this is a
string and this is a string so it's nice
to actually take strings and join them
together.
And most importantly, he didn't put in all
these annoying blank spaces in here.
This is an example of what's called string
form, string formatting, and you're going
to get good at it after the next couple of
weeks here.
But the most important thing is remember
this function str. It converts something
into the string just like int converted
something into an integer and flow,
converted something into a floating-point
number, str converts something into a
string.
Let's finish off and we'll do one more
thing.
I mentioned that there are lots of other
functions available inside Python. the way
you get at those functions, these extra
functions, these are things called modules
and they are kind of things that are
outside of basic Python that people have
built and added into Python and to get
access to those functions, you need to go
through and import them.
So, in Python, you need to say, import
module name.
So, if you go into the Hello World page,
you'll see something that says, Import
Simple GUI." Simple GUI is a module that
Scott and I built that actually opens up a
canvas and draws Hello World on it.
There are two common modules that you
should know about, that you'll need to use
as the class goes on.
One is Math and the other one is Random.
And you can take a peek at them up here in
the docs.
So, we can go to CodeSkulptor Python and
scroll down.
And there you go.
There's the Math module.
We'll just scroll down there and see.
It has kind of all the common math
functions that you're used to.
If you're looking for a math function
that's not built into Python, you can say
import math, and go down here and use all
these.
We'll go back here.
For example, I could say print Math.pi and
this is print out a very nice
approximation to pi.
And the other one that you're going to use
this week, it's going to be a random
module and it gives you the ability to
generate random numbers.
So, also, it's also described up here so
let's go up and close that.
Go back down, I look in the Random module,
and it's got a smaller set of functions
here.
But there's some functions that you're
going to be using fairly often.
The one you'll probably, the two that
you'll probably use the most will be it's
going to be random.randrage. And so, that
one you should take a look at and figure
out how it works and you'll be all good.
Okay.
So, those are some other functions you can
use in this week and the upcoming weeks.
See you next lecture.